welcome to topcast and this is episode
87 if you're an audio only listener
otherwise it's the discussion of chapter
three of the fabric of reality chapter
three being titled problem solving this
is a great overview of the process of
science in particular according to the
popularian worldview and it's a great
refutation of all the common
misconceptions
about how science is supposed to work
most of those misconceptions are still
prevalent today and they come in all
sorts of guises i've mentioned this
before for example bayesianism is just a
new incantation of the problem of
induction as applied to science so what
david seems to do here in this chapter
is to compile and kind of refine
popper's takedown of induction and it's
a really withering takedown here in this
chapter of the fabric of reality but it
goes further than just a withering
takedown of induction it gives you the
alternative it gives you the correct
idea about how science actually manages
to generate objective knowledge about
the world and i would say that no one
who actually understands what this
chapter is saying can remain a bayesian
or can remain confused about what
induction is supposed to be and what the
problem of induction is let alone how
science really proceeds and really
generates knowledge and they would tend
not to use phrases like this evidence
confirms the theory or this makes me
more confident that the theory is true
and so on
if you properly understand what's being
said in this chapter and this chapter is
of course
timely and timeless
right now we are in an epoch where
politicians in particular are supposed
to follow the science capital t the
science in other words there is supposed
to be a scientific consensus and all of
us should have policies based on the
science as if the science is settled and
we often talk about the settled science
but this is wrong this is wrong because
science like every other area of
knowledge is conjectural and at any time
it can be overturned by new evidence new
theories that explain what previously
seemed to be true but in fact turn out
to be strictly speaking false of course
none of this is to say we shouldn't take
our
best explanations seriously as our best
explanations of the world and thereby
make policy informed by those best
explanations but whether or not the best
explanations we have
are really good explanations well that's
another matter sometimes the best
explanation might be something like we
don't actually really know what's going
on here we don't have a good explanation
that could be the best explanation
ironically whatever the case if you want
to level up your thinking i think this
chapter is a great place to start it's a
chapter that if you are so far not
familiar with the work of david deutsch
and karl popper it's going to challenge
your intuitions and reformulate i would
say the way in which you do think that
happens with all of david's chapters in
both of his books of course but this one
in particular really will take the legs
out from underneath you if you haven't
considered carefully these particular
issues before so whether you have
thought deeply about how science works
or if you haven't if you're unfamiliar
with critical rationalism or papa's
worldview this chapter might very well
blow your mind so the chapter is called
problem-solving and popper actually had
a book
called all life is problem solving and
he really meant it if you can continue
to solve your problems then you will
just keep on going on living solving
your problems and in fact the joy is
found in perpetually solving your
problems the only reason you die is
because you haven't been able to solve
that problem but it too is soluble and
in fact if we consider life more broadly
as in the evolution of species over time
that too on papa's view was an attempt
at problem solving what the genes are
trying to do is to solve the problem of
how to survive in a certain niche now
whether or not you want to push the
analogy that far i don't know but all of
us have problem situations things that
we're interested in at a particular time
and place and we're trying to sort out
in order to have more fun be more
healthy have a more flourishing life and
so on and so forth so although any
particular problem might be parochial it
might just be about you at a particular
time and place this concept of life of
problem solving is a universal one it's
the way in which knowledge is generated
it's a certain lens through which we can
view the way in which progress actually
happens progress happens by continually
identifying and then solving problems or
in other words detecting errors and then
correcting them so all of this is a
similar way of orbiting a conception of
what knowledge is all about now this
chapter contains a lot of very deep
ideas a lot of subtle ideas and a lot of
what you might call aphorisms that i'm
going to highlight as we go through it's
dense it's counter-intuitive for people
who again are not familiar with this
critical rationalist view of the way in
which knowledge is generated
so it might take a while to get through
this chapter as compared to some of the
others but we will persevere and we'll
get there in the end and hopefully we'll
be able to clarify what popper has said
and what david has said and what my
understanding of this chapter is as
always without further ado let's get
into it chapter 3
problem solving and david writes i do
not know which is stranger the behavior
of shadows itself or the fact that
contemplating a few patterns of light
and shadows can force us to revise so
radically our conception of the
structure of reality the argument i have
outlined in the previous chapter is
notwithstanding its controversial
conclusion a typical piece of scientific
reasoning it is worth reflecting on the
character of this reasoning which is
itself a natural phenomenon at least as
surprising and full of ramifications as
the physics of shadows pausing their my
reflection so just remember that in the
previous chapter called shadows it was
essentially about the shadows being cast
by well at first a torch and then a
laser light
when the light passes through a double
slit this famous double-stepped
experiment
first done by thomas young back in the
1800s and if you fire this single photon
of light this single particle of light
at the apparatus you end up getting an
unexpected interference pattern and
through the chain of explanation that
david provides in that previous chapter
go to the previous episode of the fabric
of reality for that
what you conclude what you are forced
into concluding the only known
explanation of this is that there must
be other photons that you cannot detect
in this universe in other words the
universe is stupendously larger than
what we think this is why we call it a
multiverse because there are these other
universes which are other universes
which are approximately parallel to our
own they don't interact very often
except through these interference
experiments so this
what would otherwise might be termed an
insignificant observation of the
movement of single photons
leads to this stupendous conclusion that
we live in a multiverse now a lot of
people argue against this through simple
incredulity it's like how could it be so
how could this
small amount of evidence lead to such a
stupendous conclusion but we can refer
to any number of other observations like
this david makes this point elsewhere
that the history of astronomy certainly
is a history of
seeing smudges on a photographic plate
here rather than there and that leads to
the conclusion that there is a whole
galaxy of stars out there or imagine
trying to explain to the ancients
that in rocks we would find evidence
that rules in favor or rules out
all other theories except that there
used to be these
large
flightless bird type creatures roaming
the earth millions upon millions of
years ago
and that's found in rocks or that some
of the pinpricks of light that the
ancients could see in space were
actually whole other worlds just like
our own and in fact beyond that there
were pinpricks of light that could not
be seen except by the use of melted sand
which arranged in a metal tube would
reveal these distant objects
all of the knowledge that we have today
seems from a particular perspective the
perspective of an ancient to be
bizarre and ridiculous a bizarre and
ridiculous conclusion to draw on such
scant evidence and the multiverse
conclusion is just another in that long
lineage of strange stories that we tell
about the world which just happen to be
true let's continue and david writes
to those who would prefer reality to
have a more prosaic structure it may
seem somehow out of proportion unfair
even that such momentous consequences
can flow from the fact that a tiny spot
of light on the screen should be here
rather than there yet they do and this
is by no means the first time in the
history of science that such a thing has
happened in this respect the discovery
of other universes is quite reminiscent
of the discovery of other planets by
early astronomers
before we send probes to the moon and
planets all our information about
planets came from spots of light or
other radiation being observed in one
place rather than another consider how
the original defining fact about planets
the fact they are not stars was
discovered watching the night sky for a
few hours one sees that the stars appear
to revolve about a particular point in
the sky they revolve rigidly holding
fixed positions relative to one another
the traditional explanation was that the
night sky was a huge celestial sphere
revolving around the earth and that the
stars were either holes in the sphere or
glowing embedded crystals however among
the thousand points of light in the sky
visible to the naked eye there are a
handful of the brightest which over
longer periods do not move as if they
were fixed on a celestial sphere they
wonder about the sky in more complex
motions they are called planets from the
greek word meaning wanderer
their wandering was a sign that the
celestial sphere explanation was
inadequate successive explanations of
the motion of planets have played an
important role in the history of science
copernicus's heliocentric theory placed
the planets in the earth in circular
orbits around the sun
kepler discovered that those orbits are
ellipses rather than circles newton
explained the ellipses through his
inverse square law of gravitational
forces and his theory was later used to
predict that the mutual gravitational
attraction of planets would cause small
deviations from elliptical orbits
the observation of such deviations led
to the discovery in 1846 of a new planet
neptune one of many discoveries that
spectacularly corroborated newton's
theory pausing there just my reflection
um this word corroborate
yes papa uses it
it kind of means in this sense
consistent with but if you go and look
it up in a dictionary what you find is
that it says something like confirm or
support which is absolutely not what is
meant here
if your theory makes a prediction
for example if you use newton's theory
of gravity to predict
that the reason why
uranus uranus is being perturbed its
orbit is being perturbed is because
there's another planet out there called
neptune and if you go looking and you
find neptune neptune that does not
confirm that does not support that does
not say
that newton's theory is actually correct
or true or something like that probably
true anything like that
what it means is that there is no other
theory that can do as good a job as
newton and so newton's theory contains
some truth within it and any theory that
could not make such a prediction is
therefore ruled out as inferior to what
newton's is
all of this might be summed up with the
word corroborator it's just that warning
flagging the situation that if you go to
the dictionary and you look up what
corporate means sometimes you'll see
confirm or support
explicitly not what popper and deutsch
mean by the word
let's continue david writes
nevertheless a few decades later
einstein's general theory of relativity
gave us a fundamentally different
explanation of gravity in terms of
curved space and time and thereby
predicted slightly different motions
again for instance it correctly
predicted that every year the planet
mercury would drift by about one ten
thousandth of a degree away from where
newton's theory said it should be it
also implied that starlight passing
close to the sun would be deflected
twice as much by gravity as newton's
theory would predict
the observation of this deflection by
arthur eddington in 1919 is often deemed
to mark the moment at which the
newtonian worldview ceased to be
rationally tenable
ironically modern reappraisals of the
accuracy of eddington's experiments
suggests this may have been premature
the experiment which has since been
repeated with great accuracy involved
measuring the positions of spots the
images of stars close to the limb of the
sun during an eclipse on our
photographic plates as astronomical
predictions became more accurate
the differences between what successive
theories predicted about the appearance
of the night sky diminished
ever more powerful telescopes and
measuring instruments have had to be
constructed to detect the differences
however the explanations underlying
these predictions have not been
converging on the contrary as i have
just outlined there has been a
succession of revolutionary changes thus
observations of ever smaller physical
effects have been forcing ever greater
changes in our worldview it may
therefore seem that we are inferring
ever grander conclusions from ever
scantier evidence what justifies these
inferences pausing there my reflection
the first thing here is that there has
been a debate even among people who
identify as popeyrians about the extent
to which and whether or not we are
converging on anything like reality or
the truth or something like that given
that it seems as though
one new theory of gravity or one
cosmological theory seems to utterly
overturn the previous theory and so this
sometimes leads some papyrians to
gravitate towards what might be called a
kunian worldview thomas kuhn a far more
popular
philosopher sociologist of science a
great rival of papa he's the most again
i think i've mentioned this before
he
wrote the structure of scientific
revolutions the most cited work in the
social sciences ever because it
basically says that science goes through
these revolutions much like happens in
the social sciences and so it cuts the
physical sciences down to size and it
says well it's not really
taken in a certain sense some people
think that it means that scientific
knowledge is not objective it just goes
through trends or fashions
that kind of thing the fancy word used
is paradigm so we have a newtonian
paradigm and then we have an einsteinian
paradigm and these two paradigms have
nothing to do with one another and one
person operating in one paradigm can't
see the truth of the other paradigm they
both work within a certain domain and we
can't say that we're converging on
anything like reality or the truth
the problem with this whole idea is
that it concentrates on what changes
from theory to theory and not what
remains the same from theory to theory
the simple fact is that whether you are
working with kepler or newton or
einstein planet still exists
this thing called gravity still exists
we just don't know the nature of it
what happens is that in kepler there's
some reason why call it gravity that the
planets go around the sun when we get to
newton we say it's a force but it
doesn't know what causes the force we
still have planets and we still have
orbits and when we get to einstein we
still have planets we still have orbits
we still have this thing called gravity
and we still say that it's approximately
the
that approximately obeys the inverse
square law and this is why we have
approximate ellipses in terms of orbits
but we get to explain what the true
nature of gravity is so far as we know
now the curvature of space-time so so
much is being preserved it's not all
overthrown it isn't a complete
revolution many of us like to
concentrate on the fact that what we're
having uh is an incremental change in
various parts of the theory of course
some parts are utterly overturned but
not the entire content of our
understanding of that particular concept
let alone all of our knowledge i don't
like i don't like to agree with the
people who say it's a complete
revolution it's not a complete
revolution a complete revolution
actually undoes everything everything
that was good is completely cast aside
and we're implementing something else
for reasons of fashion for not a good
reason and this happens in politics and
if you were to take it seriously in
science what you would be saying is
we're going to throw away even the
existence of planets even the existence
of orbits as we change from one theory
of gravity to another but we're not
we're not doing that at all we're
throwing away some things replacing with
others tweaking things coming to a
deeper understanding but we are
preserving a whole bunch as well so
that's one thing the other thing is
david says what justifies these
inferences now i would encourage
everyone to get a hold of the audio book
of the fabric of reality it's relatively
new
and at the beginning of that audio book
is an introduction by david deutsch
himself and in that introduction
recorded what 20 years after he first
wrote the book he says that he would put
certain things differently and one of
the key things that he would put
differently is use of the word justifies
and it comes up again in chapter 7 of
the fabric of reality where he says it
really needs to be interpreted as a
an indication of the morally right thing
to do or the methodologically right
thing to do that's what he means by
justifiers
unfortunately it can have echoes of
justification it doesn't mean that when
you say what justifies such and such
that you are saying
what demonstrates as true such and such
that's not what he means now i tend to
think that when i read the fabric of
reality and i read david's use of the
word justifiers i'm reminded and i hope
that david doesn't regard this as an
insult i'm reminded what wittgenstein
said of his own philosophy after all
wittgenstein if you recall some of my
other podcasts i've talked about this
wittgenstein argued that there are no
such thing as philosophical problems and
going further that therefore there's no
good reason for philosophy all of our
knowledge can come to us via science and
perhaps mathematics but you have no need
really for philosophy and so then of
course people might object to
wittgenstein himself and say well hold
on wittgenstein you are a philosopher
and you have a philosophy are you saying
of your own philosophy that it's useless
and he said kind of it's like a ladder
in order to get yourself out of a deep
well if you've fallen in the deep
well-being philosophy what you do is you
use wittgenstein's philosophy to climb
your way out of the well and then once
you're out of the well you can also cast
aside the ladder you don't even need
that anymore either clever clever little
quip but i like to actually think that
that's the way
to understand david's use of the word
justified because if you really do
understand what's being said in the
fabric of reality you realize there is
no way in which you can actually
justify as true anything at all you
can't justify stuff in science or
anywhere else and by the end of the book
you understand that
so that's what the word justify is it's
like david gives you the ladder in order
to throw away this
justificationist scheme and so you can
even throw away the word to a large
extent as well however in order to get
there you have to grant people who don't
yet agree with you
the word justify okay so because it
takes a while to undo these things it's
like the word confirm or support and
various other things you know if i if
i'm speaking with someone that he the
two is completely unfamiliar with papa
and that whole way of speaking i might
very well use the word confirm and
support and that kind of thing until
such time as i can
help them to understand the papyrian
worldview and once they do then you can
turn around and say you see you never
you needed to use the word support and
you can never actually confirm the
theory so you can do away with those
entire concepts but until such time as
you're both speaking the same
philosophical language you're gonna have
to meet them halfway and so that's the
way in which i interpret justify in this
book so anyway
david goes on to say quote can we be
sure that just because a star appeared
millimetrically displaced on eddington's
photographic plate space and time must
be curved or that because a photo
detector at a certain position does not
register a hit in weak light there must
be parallel universes indeed what i have
just said understates both the fragility
and the indirectness of all experimental
evidence for we do not directly perceive
stars spots on photographic plates or
other external objects or events
we see things only when images of them
appear on our retinas and we do not
perceive those images until they have
given rise to electrical impulses in our
nerves and those impulses have been
received and interpreted by our brains
thus the physical evidence that directly
sways us and causes us to adopt one
theory a worldview rather than another
is less than millimetric it is measured
in thousandths of a millimeter the
separation of nerve fibers in the optic
nerve and in hundredths of a volt the
changes in electric potential in our
brains in our nerves that make the
difference between our perceiving one
thing and perceiving another pausing
there just my reflection on this
if you hear the phrase
evidence is theory laden or something
like that
this is one sense in which that phrase
is cashed out when you hear that phrase
evidence is theory related or perception
is theory laden any of those things
this is what is meant by that
that when you say you're you've seen
something it's not a direct experience
because we know we have a theory of
sight and how it works and it's
complicated it's not simply that you
look outside and you see the sun shining
what that means is photons of light have
actually entered your eyes and those
photons of light have fallen upon your
retina which have given rise to well
actually it's really complicated it goes
through causes chemical changes in
the photosensitive cells of the eye in
the light sensitive cells of the eye and
that gives rise to electrical impulses
which travel along the optic nerve and
into the brain so this whole process is
what seeing is it is a complicated
process speaking of perceptions now your
perception might change a little bit
because i've decided that i'm going to
just slightly alter my setup here so
that the audio sounds a bit better
when i record video the audio sounds one
way i've noticed
and and when i don't by plugging my
microphone directly into my computer it
sounds better
you don't need to hear all the details i
suppose anyway you won't be seeing my
face again for the remainder of this
episode this is just an experiment i
want to see
here
the difference between the audio only
type version and the video and audio
type version
an overwhelming majority of people only
listen to me they don't watch me i think
it's like a ratio of 10 to 1 almost and
so
just to make things a little bit easier
for me i'm just going to record audio
only for the remainder of this with the
exception
that there are a few images to come and
the reason there are images to come is
because david provides them in the book
and so i want to show you those images
so they'll be important but for now i'm
just switching to audio only okay so
here we are back with the audio only
version now to my ear
this sounds better
and it's also rather easier for me to
edit however if i get feedback to say
that people would prefer
the video then i will continue to do
that and i'm not going to stop doing
that at least for the introductions i
would say
but for rather the majority of the
podcast makes things a lot easier and i
think it actually sounds better if i'm
just doing audio for various technical
reasons anyway
let's keep going i'm up to the point in
the book where david writes quote
however we do not accord equal
significance to all our sensory
impressions in scientific experiments we
go to great lengths to bring to our
perceptions those aspects of external
reality that we think might help us to
distinguish between rival theories we
are considering
before we even make an observation we
decide carefully where and when we
should look and what we should look for
pausing there my reflection okay this
idea
that we look for observations which can
decide between rival theories is so
important this is the concept of a
crucial test and david has written an
absolutely wonderful
paper all about this called the logic of
experimental tests with a particular
emphasis on evaretti and quantum theory
but you can actually read through the
paper without ever bothering with the
quantum theory part unless you're a
quantum physicist because it explains
what the point of a crucial test is this
particular jewel in the crown if you
like
of
the scientific method insofar as there
is a scientific method but this point of
crucial test is where you've got two
rival theories there is an observation
which will rule out one of them leaving
you with only one theory that explains
the evidence before you this is where
certain subjects let's just call them
out let's say psychology sometimes gets
things wrong
if you're going around collecting data
and you're trying to extrapolate from
the data but you don't actually have a
theory to begin with you're missing the
point of science you're missing the
point of collecting data collecting data
essentially amounts to doing an
experiment actually going out into the
world
making observations but in psychology
rather too often they simply collect
data
and then don't have an explanation
before they begin collecting the data
here's a caricature or a cartoonish
version of such a psychological study
and the only reason i know about this is
because in schools of certain kinds you
can actually study a subject called
psychology now what they do there is
they actually can force the students to
undertake an experimental study and what
they do is they do things like well
let's check how impulsive
different groups of people are so let's
check how impulsive people are
given their gender so we'll check how
impulsive a male person is versus a
female person and the way in which you
might do this well the standard thing of
let's let's put them in a room with a
cake for a little while and let's see
who eats the cake first and let's say
you have a statistically significant
number of occasions where it's the male
that takes a bite out of the cake before
the female does and so on this basis you
then draw the conclusion therefore males
are more impulsive than females but you
haven't actually at any point figured
out the reason why all you're saying is
that there is a correlation that you've
discovered there's no explanation there
though is it really the maleness versus
the femaleness is that the thing is it
something deeper than that is it
something about the amount of
testosterone and if it is the amount of
testosterone
why by what mechanism or is it something
deeper still than that is it in the
genes if it is in the genes how so
is it something to do with the way in
which
males are raised as children that causes
to be more impulsive which could rule
out this whole idea that males are more
impulsive than females in the first
place it could simply be a
cultural thing have nothing to do with
males whatsoever and having everything
to do with ideas this is the poverty of
explanationless
science
you can't do an experiment a legitimate
experiment a useful experiment until
such times you have an explanation and
the explanation is then going to be
tested against reality that's what the
experiment is and in fact it's even
worse than this because if you have only
one explanation and you do do an
experiment and the experiment disagrees
with your explanation there is no way to
refute throw away discard the
explanation after all how then do you go
about explaining the observations you
are making and how do you know that it's
not the experimental method that is
falling apart that is the reason for the
disagreement this is the jooheon quine
thesis again and papa was fully aware of
it and deutsche's fully aware of it and
anyone who is a proporion is fully aware
of it sometimes you can do an experiment
and although the experiment disagrees
with the explanation with the scientific
theory that doesn't necessarily it
doesn't logically mean that the theory
is wrong especially in a case where you
only have one explanation the only
explanation the scientific explanation
which is why david has said there quote
and i'll just continue reading before we
even make an observation
we decide carefully where and when we
should look and what we should look for
often we use complex specially
constructed instruments such as
telescopes and photomultipliers yet
however sophisticated the instruments we
use and however substantially external
causes to which we attribute their
readings we perceive those readings
exclusively through our own sense organs
there is no getting away from the fact
that we human beings are small creatures
with only a few inaccurate incomplete
channels through which we receive all
information from outside ourselves we
interpret this information as evidence
of a large and complex external universe
or multiverse but when we are weighing
up this evidence we are literally
contemplating nothing more than patterns
of weak electric current trickling
through our own brains pausing there my
reflection now you will notice if you
are a deutsche superfan so to speak
that he has used the phrase there
weighing up this evidence and again
that might set off alarm bells i'm sure
he doesn't literally mean in fact we
know he doesn't literally mean weighing
up this evidence because he explains
this in the beginning of infinity
what would be meant there is just a
prosaic idea of considering this
evidence okay we're not weighing some
evidence against others it's just a turn
of phrase we're not actually
weighing up
by some process after all evidence
doesn't have a particular weight either
the evidence agrees with an explanation
or it doesn't and if it doesn't
then we have a problem and we have to go
about solving that problem if we have
two theories and it agrees with one
explanation but does not agree with the
other the one that it doesn't agree with
is refuted typically speaking could
always be it can always logically be the
case that the experiment has been
performed incorrectly it always comes
down to explanations and argument and
having a good understanding of what's
going on throughout the experiment but
especially in cases where you only have
one
theory and you have one experiment which
disagrees with your one theory you
simply have a problem you don't know
what's going wrong you're not in a
position to say therefore the theory is
incorrect you don't know you don't know
if the theory the explanation is
incorrect or your theory of the
experiment is incorrect the theory of
how the instrument that is being used in
the experiment is working that it's all
theories everything observation is
theory laid and as we say perception is
theory later the evidence is theory
laden the whole world is theory laden
it's all being interpreted by your mind
and back to the book what justifies the
inferences we draw from these patterns
it is certainly not a matter of logical
deduction there is no way of proving
from these or from any other
observations that the external universe
or multiverse exists at all let alone
that the electric currents received by
our brains stand in any particular
relationship to it
anything or everything that we perceive
might be an illusion or a dream
illusions and dreams are after all
common
solipsism the theory that only one mind
exists and that what appears to be
external reality is only a dream taking
place in that mind cannot be logically
disproved reality might consist of one
person presumably you dreaming a
lifetimes experiences or it might
consist of just you and me or just the
planet earth and its inhabitants and if
we dreamed evidence any evidence of the
existence of other people or other
planets or other universes
that would prove nothing about how many
of those things there really are pausing
there just my reflection so this idea of
solipsism this idea that only you exist
and everything's being dreamed into
reality it just keeps cropping up again
and again in the history of philosophy
one of the earliest mentions is of
course plato's cave this idea that
what he got right of course in in
plato's cave is that we only have access
to our senses we don't have direct
access to reality but taken
too far it means that perhaps external
reality doesn't even exist at all that
all you have are just your senses
descartes came up with a method of doubt
and he thought that well it could be
possible that there would be this evil
demon that might be deceiving you you
know this all-powerful almost
all-powerful demon that could be
tricking you into thinking the external
reality actually exists some sort of
creature with superpowers
than the movies the matrix are all about
this as well that perhaps we're sitting
inside of some sort of computer
simulation type thing and taken to an
even more extreme we have nick bostrom
simulation hypothesis all of these are
logically equivalent they're what lully
tanet has called supernaturalism this
idea that you're just appealing to some
idea that is a priori beyond our
capacity to refute
well refute experimentally anyway
because it puts itself beyond what
physics can possibly probe in other
words beyond physical or natural law
it's supernatural supernaturalism i
think that's exactly right we can ignore
all these things because we can refute
them not by experiment but by argument
which is where david's going to get to
and so david picks up the discussion
where he writes quote since solipsism
and an infinity of related theories are
logically consistent with your
perceiving any possible observational
evidence it follows that you can
logically deduce nothing about reality
from observational evidence how then
could i say that the observed behavior
of shadows rules out the theory that
there is only one universe or that
eclipse observations make the newtonian
world view rationally untenable how can
that be so if ruling out does not mean
disproving what does it mean why should
we feel compelled to change our world
view or indeed any opinion at all on
account of something being ruled out in
that sense this critique seems to cast
doubt on the whole of science on any
reasoning about external reality that
appeals to observational evidence
if scientific reasoning does not amount
to sequences of logical deductions from
the evidence what does it amount to why
should we accept its conclusions
this is known as the problem of
induction pausing there my reflection
okay so let's just
recap that here so that we have in mind
a clear understanding of what we mean by
the problem of induction
so the story goes
typically if you ask someone who is
familiar let's say with science
but not necessarily with the philosophy
of science
what we do
in science to produce knowledge of the
physical world
what they might say
sometimes
is we make observations and from those
observations we deduce
explanations
we
read from the book of nature so to speak
we observe the world
and then
from those observations
logically derive a theory about what's
going on
and in fact by the way this is what the
bayesians kind of think they just think
that they derive
probably true theories rather than
absolutely true theories and they can
calculate how confident they are in the
theory that they deduce from these
observations but whatever the case this
problem of induction as it was
classically framed was something like
well you observe
day after day morning after morning the
sun rising and therefore you deduce
in some way the theory
that the sun will continue to rise
tomorrow now of course that's merely a
prediction that's not an explanation
we're about to get to that as well as
david goes on to say quote
the name problem of induction derives
from what was for most of the history of
science the prevailing theory of how
science works
the theory was that there exists short
of mathematical proof a lesser but still
worthy form of justification called
induction pausing there just my
reflection again this word induction has
lots of different meanings firstly there
is a deductive method in mathematics
called
proof by induction and it is
deductive so it's important not to get
the two confused because they're
actually opposites of one another one is
a
logical method of proof in mathematics
what typically happens by the way and
this is this happens in high school
mathematics among other things what you
do is you're given a formula
you then show that the formula works for
n equals 1 it's valid for n equals 1.
then you assume that it's true for some
general case n equals k and then you
show that given that assumption it
actually works for n equals k plus 1
and given that you've already shown that
it works for the n equals 1 case
then substituting in n equals 1 for n
equals k and showing that therefore it
works for one then two and on into
infinity given the formula you've just
got you've proved via the method of
induction that this formula works for
all possible cases of n now that's
perfectly valid that is a perfectly
valid way of doing mathematical proof
it's deduction
by unhappy coincidence i get i haven't
looked into the history of this but by
unhappy coincidence i guess that the
philosophers of science early on went
well there must be a similar method in
science we're going to use the same word
induction where we can prove
such a thing holds for all cases often
to infinity this doesn't work for a
whole bunch of reasons because
unlike with a mathematical formula which
is necessarily true it's predictable in
necessarily true ways the physical world
is not like that it's not like that at
all we know this we know that tomorrow
doesn't look like yesterday things
change in the physical world all the
time we don't understand all the reasons
why by the way but the certainly the the
laws of physics mandates that not
everything that happens from day to day
today will be precisely the same there
are other forms of induction as well by
the way this word induction it also
works in physics in various ways they
say well it has different meanings
there's
charging something by induction so if
you have an electric charge on one
object and you bring it close to another
object which is either to not yet
charged and in bringing these two things
closer what happens the neutral one well
let's say let's say you've got an object
a the way that electrical induction
works well static electrical induction
anyway imagine two spheres
metal one of which has a negative
electric charge you've charged it by
some method and a second sphere which is
neutral you bring them close to each
other but not touching not touching and
if you have them such they're not
touching and they're both metal spheres
the first of which is negative well it
will push away the negative charges on
the second sphere and you can then
discharge those negative charges on the
second sphere because you have this
dipole and when you do do the
discharging this is called charging by
induction now there's also other kinds
of electrical induction as well that go
on there's also the induction that
happens when an employee enters a new
workplace for the first time they
undergo a process of induction so
induction is curious in that it has very
very many different meanings that have
very little to do
one with another but this kind of
induction this induction in the
philosophy of science is about
if you can't derive logically if you
can't prove that a particular theory is
true given the evidence perhaps you can
get almost true
highly confident something like that and
so we don't have deduction but we have
induction which is almost as good that's
what was hoped for in science
david writes induction was contrasted on
the one hand with the supposedly perfect
justification provided by deduction and
on the other hand with supposedly weaker
philosophical or intuitive forms of
reasoning that do not even have
observational evidence to back them up
in the inductivist theory of scientific
knowledge observations play two roles
first in the discovery of scientific
theories and second in their
justification
a theory is supposed to be discovered by
extrapolating or generalizing the
results of observations then if large
numbers of observations conform to the
theory and none deviates from it the
theory is supposed to be justified made
more believable probable or reliable
this scheme is illustrated in this
picture that i'm putting up on the
screen
or figure 3.1 in the original book just
pausing there my reflection on this
i've written an article that's on my
website and you can just google my name
brett hall induction and it should come
up for you and it's an attempt to show
that precisely that sentence there that
david writes where he said quote if
large numbers of observations conform to
the theory and none deviates from it the
theory is supposed to be justified made
more believable probable or reliable and
my favorite example of this is anyone
with a thermometer
and
a stove
and a pot of water can do the experiment
where you turn on the stove which
typically is a relatively constant
source of heat and monitor the
temperature over time and if you plot a
graph of the temperature versus the time
and you have no clue or you pretend i
have no clue about what's going to
happen next you will notice a
wonderfully linear trend or very close
to linear anyway for example maybe every
minute the temperature of the water goes
up by 10 degrees celsius
and if you monitor the temperature
between you know 20 degrees celsius up
to 80 degrees celsius you get this
lovely trend line and you could you
could monitor it every single degree
that it rises
what does this suggest well it suggests
that if you think induction is a thing
then you can extrapolate the theory
that
as you heat the water it continues to
rise in temperature
now until until you boil the water you
don't know that at 100 degrees celsius
something special and unexpected happens
the temperature of the water doesn't
continue to rise but you only know that
you would only know that observation if
you actually ever got to the point where
you reach the boiling point of water you
can never rule out there's not going to
be a surprising observation out there
like the boiling of water so anyway i i
think that that is proof enough so to
speak refutation enough at least that
induction cannot possibly be the way
that science works putting aside what
david's about to say next that it's not
even predominantly about extrapolation
and prediction that's just a small part
and anyway you can't make the prediction
until you have an explanatory theory
behind you let's keep going david writes
quote the inductivist analysis of my
discussion of shadows would therefore go
something like this we make a series of
observations of shadows and see
interference phenomena stage one
the results conform to what would be
expected if there existed parallel
universes which affect one another in
certain ways but at first no one notices
this eventually stage two someone forms
the generalization that interference
will always be observed under the given
circumstances and and thereby induces
the theory that parallel universes are
responsible with every further
observation of interference stage 3 we
become a little more convinced of that
theory after a sufficiently long
sequence of such observations and
provided that none of them ever
contradicts a theory we conclude stage 4
that the theory is true although we can
never be absolutely sure we are for all
practical purposes convinced
it is hard to know where to begin
criticizing the inductivist conception
of science it is so profoundly false in
so many different ways perhaps the worst
flaw from my point of view is to share
non-sequitur that a generalized
prediction is tantamount to a new theory
pausing there going back and just
reading that that's really important
the sheer non-sequitur
that a generalized prediction
is tantamount to a new theory okay so
what david's saying there is that
just making a prediction so
if if you're observing
again classic theory classic example
rather
the sun rising each day
and on that basis you say therefore the
sun will rise tomorrow that's not a new
explanatory theory you haven't explained
anything you're just saying what will
happen tomorrow but you've never said
why you haven't said why
uh that whole thing the the black swan
thing you know um you're just observing
whites one after white swan after white
swan
and therefore you conclude on that basis
that all swans are white but that's not
a theory either that's not really a part
of science saying all swans are what we
want to know why
why are swans whites why can't they for
example be black swans even though there
are that's not what the science of
ornithology the study of birds is about
it's about trying to have an
understanding of the commonalities
between different bird species what a
bird is as distinct from a mammal and so
on and so forth it's not all swans are
white it's not all
x or y or the sun will continue to do
this tomorrow or
those things are derivations from good
explanations which we don't yet have on
this conception of how science works but
we're about to get there in the
popularian view so david goes on to say
like all scientific theories of any
depth
the theory that there are parallel
universes
simply does not have the form of a
generalization from the observations
did we observe first one universe then a
second and a third and then induce that
there are trillions of them was the
generalization that planets will wander
around the sky in one pattern rather
than another equivalent to the theory
that planets are worlds in orbit around
the sun and the earth is one of them it
is also not true that repeating our
observations is the way in which we
become convinced of scientific theories
as i have said theories are explanations
not merely predictions if one does not
accept a proposed explanation of a set
of observations making the observations
over and over again is seldom the remedy
still less can it help us to create a
satisfactory explanation
when we cannot think of one at all
pausing near my reflection it's
interesting in the history of astronomy
as well
if you look at
people trying to explain astronomers
trying to explain early on
how the solar system formed
the theory of our solar system actually
reached out beyond the solar system to
other stars so
the story here is that around our sun
coalesced all the other planets
which formed from that original gas and
dust cloud out of which the sun formed
as well and so did the other stars out
there why do i bring this up well
we hadn't yet observed any other planets
out there orbiting any other stars until
i think 94 1994 i think that was the
first time we saw it if it wasn't then
it was very close to them certainly we
hadn't actually seen with our telescopes
any evidence of planets orbiting other
stars prior to let's say 1980 but
theories of solar system formation were
absolutely there and suggested there
should be planets orbiting most stars
out there that was already thought as
being the case but the theory that we
had of those planets also said that with
the current telescope technology we
couldn't observe them they had to invent
new techniques in order to observe the
planets that they predicted and thought
were there so it wasn't like we were
observing planet after planet after
planet orbiting star after star after
star in order to reach the conclusion
that therefore there are planets
orbiting most stars no we already had
the theory about solar system formation
which applied not only to our solar
system but also to all other stars out
there that's how science works we have
the conjectured creative explanation
which reaches out from the thing we're
observing to all the unobserved stuff
and then maybe later we can figure out
ways to observe that unobserved stuff or
hear the two unobserved stuff as we did
with extrasolar planets david goes on to
say
as i have said theories are explanations
not merely predictions if one does not
accept a proposed explanation of a set
of observations making the observations
over and again is seldom the remedy
still less can it help to create a
satisfactory explanation when we cannot
think of one at all and not just to
repeat what david said there
as i have said theories are explanations
not merely predictions if one does not
accept a proposed explanation of a set
of observations making the observations
over and over again is seldom the remedy
still less can it help us to create a
satisfactory explanation when we cannot
think of one at all
furthermore
even mere predictions can never be
justified by observational evidence as
bertrand russell illustrated in his
story of the chicken okay pausing here
i'm just going to tell this in my own
words just to make it uh faster than
merely reading it so this idea of
russell's chicken was a pad the parable
of russell's chicken which i think i've
told maybe a dozen times now in this
podcast series the idea is this farmer
is keeping a chicken
and the chicken is being fed day after
day after day and so the chicken who's
an inductivist reasoner
of a kind
thinks that he's going to continue to be
fed day after day after day hmm
well he's sorely disappointed when on
christmas eve or something like that
his neck is rung and he's
killed and baked and eaten by the farmer
now what does this say well it says that
you number one you already need a theory
in mind don't you you need to have the
theory that
the farmer has some sort of benevolent
feelings towards you if you're the
chicken uh being fed day after day after
day but there's another theory that is
consistent with those observations
perfectly consistent which is that the
farmer is fattening you up
to slaughter you for christmas dinner
and an infinite number of other
explanations as well as to why you're
being fed day after day after day
the thing is whether or not you have a
good explanation and can be
experimentally tested in some way what
david says all about this
in his way is that um
this disappointment experienced by
russell's chicken has also been
experienced by trillions of other
chickens
this
inductively justifies the conclusion
that induction cannot justify any
conclusions however
this line of criticism lets inductivism
off far too lightly it does illustrate
the fact that repeated observations
cannot justify theories but in doing so
it entirely misses or rather accepts a
more basic misconception namely that the
inductive extrapolation of observations
to form new theories is even possible
okay so that again
that the inductive extrapolation of
observations to form new theories is
even possible in fact it is impossible
to extrapolate observations unless
one already has placed them within an
explanatory framework for example in
order to induce its false prediction
russell's chicken must first have had in
mind a false explanation of the farmer's
behavior perhaps it guessed that the
farmer harboured benevolent feelings
towards chicken pausing there my
reflection yes so here the idea is
you need you start with theories you
must have a theory to begin with before
you can make an extrapolation so in this
case the theory was
it's almost like you're assuming the
conclusion you're assuming okay the
farmer is benevolent okay that's the
idea so therefore the farmer will
continue to feed the chicken but why is
the farmer continuing to feed the
chicken because of benevolent it's this
wonderfully self-contained little thing
but whatever the case you've already got
the theory there the theory is already
in hand it's not observations leading to
the theory no it's a theory
that explains the observations or
purportedly explains the observations in
fact gets quite wrong it's a false
explanation absent absentee theory
you're not really saying much like if i
go back to
that the sun
has risen every day of my life let's say
and i say well on that basis therefore
the sun will rise again tomorrow what
problem am i solving
it is the problem should i expect the
sun to rise tomorrow and if if the
answer is yes
why
because it's risen every day previously
how does that follow it follows i can
follow only if i have an explanation as
to why
all times in the past should resemble
all times in the future you know for
example in the real in the real case you
know at this particular place on the
earth uh the earth is rotating and
therefore that causes the sun to come to
appear on the horizon approximately
every 24 hours but of course we know
it's completely false if you go you know
up to the arctic circle or something
like that i'm skipping apart and david
goes on to explain more about russell's
chicken you know the on the one hand you
can say russell's chicken extrapolates
that he's going to continue to be fed
every single day based on the fact that
he has thus far been fed every single
day and on the other hand if he has a
different theory
that he's being fed every single day
only because he's being fattened up so
they can be slaughtered
well you've got
the same set of observations
you know namely on being fed every
single day leading to two contradictory
theories so what does david say about
that he goes on to write quote the fact
that the same observational evidence can
be extrapolated to give two
diametrically opposed predictions
according to which explanation one
adopts and cannot justify either of them
is not some accidental limitation of the
farming art environment it is true of
all observational evidence under all
circumstances observations could not
possibly play either of the roles
assigned to them in the inductance
scheme even in respect of mere
predictions let alone genuine
explanatory theories admittedly
inductivism is based on the common sense
theory of the growth of knowledge that
we learn from experience and
historically it was associated with the
liberation of science from dogma and
tyranny but if we want to understand the
true nature of knowledge and its place
in the fabric of reality we must face up
to the fact that inductivism is false
root and branch no scientific reasoning
and indeed no successful reasoning of
any kind has ever fitted the inductivist
description pausing now my reflection
yes so of course we have this idea which
is also known as empiricism
that it at least gets something right
okay the something that it gets right is
better to learn from experience better
to learn from an encounter with reality
how is that better better than what
better than authority better than just
opening up your scripture let's say or
listening to
the man wearing the dress the priest or
whatever listening to what they say and
just doing what they say okay which is
certainly better than just making it all
up on your own constantly as well okay
so there are there are degrees of
getting things wrong so to speak um
trying never to learn anything and never
listen to anything never to observe
anything that's one level of error
thinking that one particular person or
one particular book has all the answers
that's another level
at least you're taking into account
the
ancient wisdom perhaps
and then there is of course well let's
actually get feedback from reality in
some way shape or form but if you think
that getting feedback from reality in
the form of just repeatedly observing
the same thing over and over again is
the way that it works that's wrong as
well so all of those ways
aren't as good at all they don't capture
the truth anywhere near like the
critical rationalist way the popularian
view of observations are about ruling
between
competing theories okay which is what
we're about to get to david goes on to
write
quote what then is
the pattern of scientific reasoning and
discovery
we have seen that inductivism and all
other prediction-centered theories of
knowledge are based on a misconception
what we need is an explanation-centred
theory of knowledge a theory of how
explanations come into being and how
they are justified a theory of how why
and when we should allow our perceptions
to change our worldview
once we have such a theory we need no
separate theory of predictions for given
an explanation of some observable
phenomenon it is no mystery how one
obtains predictions and if one has
justified an explanation then any
predictions derived from that
explanation are automatically justified
to pausing the my reflection now
remember of course david deutsch is the
person that figured out
what a good explanation is and therefore
a way of distinguishing between
different explanations this hard to vary
criterion which meant that well you know
people make
discoveries throughout their life and so
between the time of writing this
the fabric of reality and the beginning
affinity apparently he's
created the
good way of delineating between good and
bad explanations which makes this talk
of
justification redundant like i say you
could view it as being wittgenstein's
ladder allowing you to climb out of the
well of justificationism and once you're
out of that well you can just discard
the ladder and you don't need to use the
word anymore but better yet read this in
light of the beginning of infinity just
consider that the beginning of infinity
the content there explains what really a
good explanation is so we don't worry
about justifying explanations we just
have to worry about what a good
explanation is compared to a bad
explanation or non-explanation and
therefore if we have competing good
explanations at a particular point in
time
what means by which we will refute one
and not the other and in science of
course that's the crucial experiment
anyway here david goes on to write
fortunately the prevailing theory of
scientific knowledge which in its modern
form is due largely to the philosopher
karl popper and which is one of my four
main strands of explanation of the
fabric of reality can indeed be regarded
as a theory of explanations in this
sense it regards science as a
problem-solving
process
inductivism regards the catalogue of our
past observations as a sort of skeletal
theory supposing that science is all
about filling in the gaps in that theory
by interpolation and extrapolation
problem solving does begin with an
inadequate theory but not with the
notional theory
consisting of past observations it
begins with our best existing theories
when some of those theories seem
inadequate to us and we want new ones
that is what constitutes a problem
thus contrary to the inductive scheme
shown in figure 3.1 scientific discovery
needs not begin with observational
evidence but it does always begin with a
problem
by a problem i do not necessarily mean a
practical emergency or a source of
anxiety i just mean a set of ideas that
seems inadequate and worth trying to
improve the existing explanation may
seem too glib or too labored it may seem
unnecessarily narrow or unrealistically
ambitious one may glimpse a possible
unification with other ideas or a
satisfactory explanation in one field
may appear to be irreconcilable with an
equally satisfactory explanation in
another or it may be that there have
been some surprising observations such
as the wandering of planets which
existing theories did not predict and
cannot explain this last type of problem
resembles stage one of the inductivist
scheme but only superficially
for an unexpected observation
never initiates a scientific discovery
unless the pre-existing theories already
contain the seeds of the problem
for example clouds wander even more than
planets do this unpredictable wandering
was presumably familiar long before
planets were discovered moreover
predicting the weather would always have
been favourable to farmers seafarers and
soldiers so there would always have been
an incentive to theorise about how
clouds move
yet it was not meteorology that blazed
the trail for modern science but
astronomy observational evidence about
meteorology was far more readily
available than in astronomy but no one
paid much attention to it and no one
induced any theories from it about cold
fronts or anticyclones the history of
science was not crowded with disputes
dogmas heresies speculations and
elaborate theories about the nature of
clouds and emotion
why because under the established
explanatory structure for weather it was
perfectly comprehensible that cloud
motion should be unpredictable
common sense suggests that clouds move
with the wind when they drift in other
directions it is reasonable to surmise
that the wind can be different at
different altitudes and is rather
unpredictable and so it is easy to
conclude that there is no more to be
explained some people no doubt took this
view about planets and assumed that they
were just glowing objects on the
celestial sphere blown about by high
altitude winds or perhaps moved by
angels and that there was no more to be
explained but others were not satisfied
with that
and guessed that there were deeper
explanations behind the wandering of
planets so they searched for such
explanations and found them
at various times in the history of
astronomy there appeared to be a mass of
unexplained observational evidence at
other times only a scintilla or none at
all but always if people had chosen what
to theorize about according to the
cumulative number of observations of a
particular phenomena they would have
chosen clouds rather than planets yet
they chose planets and for diverse
reasons some reasons depended on
preconceptions about how cosmology ought
to be or on arguments advanced by
ancient philosophers or on mystical
numerology some were based on the
physics of the day others on mathematics
or geometry some have turned out to have
objective merit others not
but every one of them amounted to this
it seemed to someone that the existing
explanations
could and should be improved on one
solves a problem by finding new or
amended theories containing explanations
which do not have the deficiencies but
do retain the merits of existing
explanations
this figure figure 3.2 from the book
shows
that
after a problem presents itself which is
stage one the next stage always involves
conjecture proposing new theories or
modifying or reinterpreting old ones in
the hope of solving the problem that
stage two
the conjectures are then criticized
which if the criticism is rational
entails examining and comparing them to
see which offers the best explanations
according to the criteria inherent in
the problem which is stage three when a
conjectured theory fails to survive
criticism that is when it appears to
offer worse explanations than other
theories do it is abandoned
if we find ourselves abandoning one of
our originally held theories in favor of
one of the newly proposed ones which is
stage four we tentatively deem our
problem-solving enterprise to have made
progress i say tentatively because
subsequent problem solving will probably
involve altering or replacing even these
new apparently satisfactory theories and
sometimes even resurrecting some of the
apparently unsatisfactory ones thus the
solution however good is not the end of
the story it is a starting point for the
next problem-solving process which is
stage five
this illustrates another of the
misconceptions behind inductivism
just pausing there my reflection
this is uh reminiscent of now i'm going
to have to go from memory here
of a quotation from papa
and he said words to the effect anyway
i'm going to mangle the exact quotation
but something to the effect of i think
there is only one way to do science or
any kind of inquiry for that matter and
that is to fall in love with a problem
until such time as you solve it at which
point you will find a whole family of
new daughter problems in other words if
you find a problem you're really
interested in and you solve it you will
find that in solving that problem it
doesn't end your quest there in fact it
reveals it gives birth to if you like it
gives rise to all these other more
interesting problems as well
this is the history of science for
example uh in in solving the problem
of what's the correct theory of gravity
or the more correct area of gravity
newton's theory of gravity or iron signs
zero gravity once we figure out we've
solved the problem it's einstein's
theory of gravity we then have a whole
bunch of other new problems what can we
use this new theory of gravity for what
does it
permit or what does it prohibit what
does it allow all these new kinds of
technologies based upon this new theory
of gravity so we end up with a whole
bunch of new problems that quest
for identifying problems and solving
those problems thereby growing knowledge
is an unending quest
and on this point david writes and this
is i think where we'll end it for today
as he said
the solution however good is not the end
of the story it is a starting point he
goes on to say
this illustrates another of the
misconceptions behind inductivism
in science the objective of the exercise
is not to find a theory that will
or is likely to
be deemed true forever it is to find the
best theory available now and if
possible to improve on all available
theories
a scientific argument is intended to
persuade us that a given explanation is
the best one available it does not and
could not say anything about how that
explanation will fare when in the future
it is subjected to new types of
criticism and compared with explanations
that have yet to be invented a good
explanation may make good predictions
about the future but the one thing that
no explanation can even begin to predict
is the content or quality of its own
future rivals just pausing there
end of the reading for today
note that really important limitation
upon the growth of knowledge that david
really emphasizes in the beginning of
infinity but here it is here in the
fabric of reality
that
no theory today no explanation we have
can predict the content of its successes
that would be to predict the growth of
knowledge something that cannot be done
and this is why
by the way we can't predict what people
will do moment to moment people are
knowledge creators they're inherently
unpredictable they use their capacity to
generate knowledge to come up with the
subsequent theories but you can't
predict the content of those subsequent
theories if you did you would have it in
hand already so it wouldn't be a
prediction it would be a theory that you
already have
this is why we say it's inherently
unpredictable
if it was predictable if the growth of
knowledge was predictable then suddenly
logically you would have
a prediction of the future knowledge
that is to come but that's not possible
if it was possible again it would mean
that you've generated that knowledge now
and so you'd have it now so it wouldn't
be a prediction in the first place
it's such a subtle point easily missed a
prediction is about a future state of
affairs but if you're saying that the
content of future knowledge is x y and z
and x y z is only supposed to be
discovered in the future at some point
but you've discovered it now
how is that a prediction that's just a
statement of the knowledge that you have
now not the knowledge that you will have
in the future it's the knowledge that
you have now so it ceases to be a
prediction it's a curious outworking of
this particular way of arguing but it is
completely sound that's what the truth
of the matter is and that is why
people are unique and unpredictable and
although they're determined by the laws
of physics like everything else
they're inherently unpredictable and
this is why we use terms like free will
at least why i use a term like free will
to label
this
unusual quality that people have that
sets them apart from all other known
systems in the universe not merely other
animals everything else we know of
everything else we've hit the two been
able to create generate explain okay so
once we can explain ourselves how it is
we go about generating these
explanations still we won't be able to
predict the future content of our
knowledge but we might have
whatever the algorithm is
that is able to generate explanatory
knowledge and then we'll have the
algorithm for a person but even then we
won't be able to predict what that
person will do that person will have a
creative capacity to generate
explanations
or free will whatever you want to say
anyway
going off on my hobby horse again that's
where we'll end it for today there's
still more yet to read in this chapter
problem solving this in all encompassing
really vision not only of science
but
as papa said all life is problem-solving
all of the different areas of our
intellectual life that we're interested
in our personal life that we're
interested in and just all the ways in
which we might want to make progress
personally as a community as a
civilization is encapsulated by this
problem-solving enterprise
rather than a search for final truth
which would be an end of science and end
of um
and end of knowledge creation we don't
expect that we just expect to
continually solve problems
that's the way to find contentment in
the world to continually
solve your problems that's
fun finding solutions continuously and
then finding new problems that are more
interesting that's one of the meanings
of life
okay until next time bye-bye
[Music]
you